In AD 180, Spanish-Roman General Maximus Decimus Meridius leads the Roman army to a decisive victory against the Germanic tribes near Vindobona, ending a long war on the Roman frontier and winning the favor of Emperor Marcus Aurelius. The emperor is already old and dying, and although he has a son, Commodus, he asks Maximus to succeed him as a regent and turn Rome back into a republic. The emperor speaks with Commodus afterwards and attempts to explain his decision. A weeping Commodus retorts that Marcus Aurelius never valued his son, and strangles the emperor.

Maximus is confronted by Commodus, who asks for Maximus' loyalty, but the general suspects his plot and refuses. General Quintus, a subordinate and old friend to Maximus, chooses to follow Commodus' orders and sends men to the Roman province of Spain to kill Maximus's wife and son on their farm estate. Maximus manages to escape his own execution and makes the long journey to his farm on horseback, but finds his family already dead and their bodies crucified. He buries them and collapses. A passing slave caravan captures Maximus, assuming that he is a deserter. Maximus is taken to "Zucchabar" (Roman province of Mauretania) in North Africa and sold to a man named Proximo, who uses him as a gladiator.

Maximus is forced to fight in local tournaments, and wins every match because of his military skills and traumatized indifference to death. He makes friends with Proximo's other gladiators, including a Numidian named Juba and a German named Hagen. His successes allow Proximo to bring the team to the Roman Colosseum, where Commodus has organized 150 days of games to honor his late father. Proximo explains to Maximus that he was himself a gladiator who fought well enough in the Colosseum to win his freedom, granted to him by Marcus Aurelius himself. Maximus realizes that if he fights well enough in the Colosseum he may have a chance to personally meet the Emperor, giving him his chance to kill Commodus.

Having arrived at the Colosseum, Proximo's team is put in a match that is meant to be a reenactment of the Battle of Zama. Maximus and his teammates are on foot, armed with spears and shields, against a cohesive and well-equipped force of mounted fighters and archers in chariots. Through Maximus's leadership, however, the team is able to destroy their opponents. Commodus comes into the arena to personally congratulate "the Spaniard" (Maximus) on his victory. Maximus braces himself to kill Commodus, but at the last moment decides against it, apparently because of the presence of the young Lucius Verus. At this point, Maximus removes his helmet and reveals himself to the startled Commodus as "commander of the armies of the north, general of the Felix legions, loyal servant of the true emperor Marcus Aurelius, father to a murdered son, husband to a murdered wife". Maximus promises to exact vengeance against Commodus, who is still in shock to learn that the general is still alive. While Commodus longs to execute the former general on the spot, he cannot as the vast arena crowd chants "Live!" repeatedly, demonstrating their support for Maximus.

Commodus tries to have Maximus killed by paying Tigris of Gaul, a former gladiator, to come back and fight Maximus. Tigris is well known, having earned his freedom by never being defeated. During the match, Colosseum staff approach Maximus from behind, holding tigers by the leash, in order to put Maximus at a disadvantage. Against all expectations, Maximus still wins, but he spares Tigris's life and is declared by the crowd as "Maximus the Merciful" and this further angers Commodus. Face to face, the emperor taunts Maximus with harrowing details of how his family died. Maximus responds by turning his back on Commodus and walking away. The emperor's own Praetorians show respect to the former general by stepping aside.

As Maximus is being escorted back to the gladiator's quarters, his former orderly Cicero approaches him and says that Maximus still has the loyalty of the Legion, encamped near Rome. Commodus's sister Lucilla and the senator Gracchus secure a meeting with Maximus, and Maximus obtains their promise to help him escape Rome, rejoin his soldiers, topple Commodus by force, and hand over power to the Senate. Commodus, however, suspects a plot against him, and forces Lucilla to confess it by threatening to kill her son. Praetorians close in upon the gladiator quarters before Maximus can leave. Proximo refuses to open the gate in order to enable Maximus to escape. When the Praetorians break through, Proximo's gladiators assault them in order to give Maximus more time. The Praetorians kill Hagen and execute Proximo. Maximus reaches the rendezvous place but more Praetorians are waiting. Cicero is killed and Maximus is captured.

Commodus, angered by his sister's betrayal, explains that if she disobeys him or kills herself he will kill Lucius. Desperate to kill Maximus and to restore his own standing, arranges a public duel between the two. Before the fight begins, Commodus stabs the chained Maximus in the side, leaving him severely weakened, but also admits obliquely to killing his own father, in Quintus's presence. During the fight, Maximus still manages to evade Commodus's blows and disarm him. Commodus asks the Praetorians to give him a sword, but Quintus orders the guards to sheathe their weapons. Commodus produces a hidden stiletto, but Maximus turns the blade back into Commodus's throat, killing him.

Maximus succumbs to the stab wound asking with his last words that reforms be made, his gladiator allies freed, and that Senator Gracchus be reinstated. As he dies, he has a vision of walking through a gate into a field of grain and of being finally reunited with his wife and son in an afterlife which resembles his country estate. The gladiators have the body of Maximus carried out for an honorable funeral as a soldier and a good man, leaving Commodus in the dirt. Some time later, Juba revisits the Colosseum at night, and he buries Maximus's two small figurines of his wife and son at the spot where the gladiator/general died. Juba promises that he will see Maximus again, "but not yet".